Opinion  Psychiatrists learned the wrong lesson from the gay rights movement
Advocates for puberty blockers don’t have science on their side.

By Benjamin Ryan
May 3, 2024 at 6:30 a.m. EDT

Benjamin Ryan is an independent journalist and has been covering LGBTQ health for over two decades.

Five decades ago, the world’s most powerful psychiatric association changed the course of LGBTQ civil rights history when it removed homosexuality from its influential bible of mental health disorders.


At annual meetings of the American Psychiatric Association during the early 1970s, activists and internal reformers compelled the association to host panels and discussions on the merits of the relevant research, fostering a rigorous debate about whether homosexuality should still be considered a pathology. The science won in 1974 and set in motion a parade of legal victories for the gay rights movement, including the right for same-sex couples to wed.

APA members gather in New York on Saturday for this same crucial meeting. The summit should again serve as a watershed moment in the care of LGBTQ people. This time, the pressing question facing American psychiatrists is how best to treat children who are distressed about their gender. In response to emerging analyses of the available research, health officials in several European nations have sharply restricted the use of puberty blockers and cross-sex hormones in this population — in some countries to research settings only. But the APA still endorses the use of these drugs as a front-line intervention for minors.

In 1974, the science lined up neatly with the demands of gay rights activists. But today, the science of pediatric gender medicine is uncertain, so it doesn’t back the cause the of groups leading the contemporary LGBTQ civil rights movement in the United States.

GLAAD has gone so far as to insist that “the science is settled” regarding pediatric gender transition. It is not. In fact, the field of pediatric gender medicine is woefully compromised by a critical lack of quality research. Evidence-based-medicine experts insist that we simply do not know whether gender-transition treatment is safe and effective for minors.

Understandably, APA leaders — and other empathetic everyday people — are wary of repeating the mistakes of the past and are inclined to stand with LGBTQ advocates, particularly as conservative groups fight for all manner of restrictive laws that target kids who identify as transgender.

During the past decade, nations across the globe saw a surge in children and adolescents with gender-related distress, a population with a high rate of other psychiatric conditions, autism and self-harm. This phenomenon has occurred amid an overall crisis in youth mental health. It is not a betrayal of gender-distressed young people’s complex needs to demand the highest possible quality of evidence to determine whether prescribing them medications that could rob them of their fertility and sexual function are in their best interest. It is the APA’s responsibility, free from ideology or politics, to make such demands — which are, in fact, in service of these young people’s well-being.

The APA’s signaling on best practices for the care of such young people is of paramount importance. The offices of psychiatrists and other mental health professionals are often the entry point into gender-transition medicalization. And in U.S. gender clinics, a therapist typically must approve a minor’s referral to an endocrinologist for puberty blockers or cross-sex hormones.

The APA has been notably silent on a landmark report published last month that was commissioned by the British National Health Service. Called the Cass Review, it concluded that pediatric gender-transition treatment is based on “remarkably weak evidence.” The report is supported by seven independently conducted systematic literature reviews — the gold standard of scientific evidence. Their findings were in line with those of six previous such reviews, conducted by European and North American investigators and published since 2019.

The program for the 2024 APA annual meeting lists only one panel that touches on pediatric gender-transition treatment, titled “Channeling Your Passion and ‘Inner Outrage’ by Promoting Public Policy for Evidence-Based Transgender Care.”

The panel notably includes Jack Turban, a University of California at San Francisco child psychiatrist and a vocal supporter of broad access to gender-transition treatment. This week, he lashed out at the Cass Review on X and asserted that the associated literature reviews “scored some of the studies incorrectly.” Turban didn’t mention the reviews deemed a few of his own widely referenced papers to be low quality.

The APA’s meeting has a proud history of transforming open debate over LGBTQ-related research and care and should do the same for trans-identifying kids. This should include asking themselves whether LGBTQ activism that once enhanced the understanding of science about this population is now clouding it.

The 1972 APA meeting included a panel featuring a gay psychiatrist who wore a gruesome costume mask and wig that disguised his identity. He opened his mouth and regaled a rapt crowd with his searing story about the agony of working from within the closet.

At the 1973 APA meeting, one psychiatrist panelist proclaimed, “All my gay patients are sick!” to which another replied, “All my straight patients are sick!” This rejoinder pointed to a fatal flaw in the research that had supported considering homosexuality a mental illness: Those supposedly scientific papers were largely based on psychiatric patients, not the general gay public; therefore their conclusions were weak and inconclusive.

The APA board was finally convinced. At the end of that year, it voted that homosexuality was not a mental disorder. The organization’s full membership effectively ratified this decision when a majority voted down a referendum to overturn it on April 8, 1974.

In March, I asked APA President Petros Levounis, who like me is a gay man, if the organization was taking into consideration the recent review papers on pediatric gender medicine.

“We do look very closely to international research,” Levounis, a psychiatrist, told me. “But this is something that has to also come through U.S. channels before we finalize our opinion.”

Now is the time for rigorous and open scientific debate in the United States about this vital subject among the nation’s psychiatrists. The APA needs to remember the power of its annual meeting to foster such a transformative free exchange of ideas. It needs to trade silence for science.
